GIWAXS/GIXS Indexing Workbench User Tutorial

Overview

The GIWAXS/GIXS workflow uses two Python programs:

1. GIWAXS PNG to NPZ Converter
2. GIWAXS/GIXS Indexing Workbench

The converter prepares numerical NPZ files from rendered GIWAXS/GIXS PNG images when original numerical data is not available.

The indexing workbench uses the experimental data and a crystal structure file to calculate and compare diffraction reflections.

Three main file types are used:

CIF
Contains the crystal structure and is used to calculate theoretical reflections.

NPZ
Contains the numerical reciprocal-space data used by the automatic indexing calculator.

PNG
Displays the experimental GIWAXS/GIXS image and is used for visual peak selection.

The PNG and NPZ serve different purposes. The PNG is used for visualization, while the automatic indexing calculation is performed using the NPZ data.


Converting a PNG to NPZ

When this step is needed

Use the PNG to NPZ Converter when the experimental measurement is available only as a rendered PNG image.

If an NPZ file containing the experimental intensity data and corresponding qr and qz axes is already available, this section can be skipped.

The converter creates an NPZ file containing:

- intensity
- qr
- qz
- mask

The intensity values are reconstructed from the colors in the PNG image. Because of this, converted PNG data should be treated as an approximation of the original numerical measurement.


1. Run the converter

Open a terminal or command prompt and navigate to the folder containing:

GIWAXS_PNG_to_NPZ_Converter.py

Run the script with Python:

python GIWAXS_PNG_to_NPZ_Converter.py

Depending on the Python installation, the command may instead be:

python3 GIWAXS_PNG_to_NPZ_Converter.py

On the first run, the program checks for the Python packages it requires. Missing pip-installable packages are installed automatically into the Python environment being used to run the script.

After the script starts, the GIWAXS Easy Batch PNG to NPZ Converter window opens.


2. Select the PNG files

Select:

Select PNG files…

Choose one or more GIWAXS/GIXS PNG images.

If all images are located in the same folder, select:

Select an entire folder…

The program displays the number of PNG files selected.


3. Enter the reciprocal-space limits

Enter the reciprocal-space limits that match the original plotted image:

- qr minimum
- qr maximum
- qz minimum
- qz maximum

All values are entered in Å⁻¹.

Example:

qr = -1.0 to 2.2 Å⁻¹
qz = -0.1 to 2.72 Å⁻¹

These limits should match the axes used in the original GIWAXS/GIXS plot.

The values are used to create the numerical q coordinates stored in the output NPZ file.

The converter saves the most recently used values, so the same limits can be reused for additional images with identical axes.


4. Check the automatic options

For a standard conversion, keep these options enabled:

Automatically detect and crop the colored q-space panel

This attempts to isolate the experimental reciprocal-space image from surrounding labels, axes, whitespace, and color bars.

Automatically identify the PNG colormap

This determines which supported colormap most closely matches the colors used in the PNG.

If automatic detection is turned off, the colormap must be selected manually.

Preview the first detected crop before converting

This can be enabled to check which portion of the PNG will actually be converted.

The preview shows the detected region on the original image and the region that will be converted.

If the selected region is correct, choose:

Use this crop

If the detected region is incorrect, choose:

Cancel conversion

Then check the image or conversion settings before trying again.


5. Convert the PNG files

Select:

Convert all selected PNG files

The conversion log shows the progress of each file.

For each successful conversion, the program reports information such as:

- detected crop
- detected colormap
- percentage of valid pixels

The converted file is saved in the same folder as the original PNG.

The output filename ends with:

_qspace_axes.npz

For example:

sample1.png

becomes:

sample1_qspace_axes.npz

The resulting NPZ file can now be used in the GIWAXS/GIXS Indexing Workbench.


Running the GIWAXS/GIXS Indexing Workbench

Open a terminal or command prompt and navigate to the folder containing:

GIWAXS_GIXS_Workbench.py

Run the program with Python:

python GIWAXS_GIXS_Workbench.py

or:

python3 GIWAXS_GIXS_Workbench.py

On the first run, the script checks for the required Python packages and installs missing pip-installable dependencies into the active Python environment.

After startup is complete, the GIWAXS/GIXS graphical interface opens.

The main interface includes:

- crystal structure input
- experimental image display
- numerical NPZ input
- automatic indexing
- manual experimental/calculated peak comparison

Most controls are located on the left side of the window. The reciprocal-space image and calculated reflection overlay are displayed on the right.


Loading the CIF file

Find the section labeled:

Lattice and preferred orientation

Next to CIF, select:

Browse…

Choose the .cif file for the material being analyzed.

The program uses the CIF structure to calculate theoretical diffraction reflections.

After loading the CIF, check the displayed lattice parameters:

- a
- b
- c
- alpha
- beta
- gamma

Also check the selected space group.

The interface contains the 230 standard crystallographic space groups. The program indicates whether the manually selected space group agrees with the space group contained in the loaded CIF.


Preferred orientation

The same section also contains:

- Preferred H
- Preferred K
- Preferred L

These values define the preferred crystallographic orientation used by the manually generated reflection pattern.

This manual reflection pattern is separate from the full automatic NPZ indexing calculation.


Loading the experimental PNG

Find the section labeled:

Experimental image and display

Next to Image, select:

Browse…

Choose the PNG image that corresponds to the experimental measurement.

The image appears in the reciprocal-space display.

The following settings control how the PNG is displayed:

Automatically crop the q-space panel

Automatically detects the plotted reciprocal-space region.

Fit image exactly inside the q-space frame

Fits the detected image region to the selected reciprocal-space limits.

Re-detect and frame image

Runs the image detection and framing process again.

Use this option if the displayed image does not align correctly with the reciprocal-space axes.


Checking the q-space limits

Check the displayed values for:

- qr minimum
- qr maximum
- qz minimum
- qz maximum

These values define the reciprocal-space region shown in the plot.

When the corresponding NPZ is loaded, the PNG can also be framed using the qr and qz axes stored directly in the NPZ.

The PNG and NPZ should represent the same experimental measurement.


Adding the NPZ calculation files

Find the automatic indexing section and select:

Add NPZ calculation files…

Choose the NPZ file that corresponds to the experimental PNG.

Multiple NPZ measurements can also be added when analyzing a measurement series.

The added measurements appear in the measurement table.

Depending on the available file information, the table can contain fields such as:

- Sample
- Series
- Angle
- Scan
- reciprocal-space limits

Check these values before starting the calculation.

If measurement information was not identified correctly, edit the appropriate table entry.


Selecting the reference NPZ

Find the section labeled:

Manual experimental peak selection and comparison

Under Reference NPZ for clicked intensity, select the NPZ that corresponds to the displayed PNG.

For standard use, keep this option enabled:

Frame the PNG using the selected NPZ q axes

This aligns the displayed PNG with the numerical reciprocal-space axes stored in the selected NPZ.


Peak snapping

Keep this option enabled during normal peak selection:

Snap click to the nearby experimental peak center

When an experimental peak is clicked, the program searches within the selected local radius and adjusts the selected position toward the nearby peak center.

The search radius can be changed using:

Local snap radius (pixels)


Choosing the automatic indexing workflow

The automatic indexing section provides three workflow options:

Fast test indexing

Runs a reduced calculation for checking the input files and basic setup.

Standard indexing

Runs the standard indexing procedure.

Improved coverage indexing

Runs the more complete indexing workflow and is the default mode in the current program.

For the complete calculation, select:

Improved coverage indexing

An output folder can also be selected if indexing results should be saved to a specific location.


Running the automatic indexing calculator

After the CIF and NPZ inputs have been loaded, select:

Run full automatic indexing calculator

The calculator analyzes the numerical NPZ data.

The calculation includes:

- feature detection
- registration and consensus analysis
- orientation searching
- calibration
- peak recovery
- multidomain testing
- validation

The progress bar shows the current stage of the calculation.

The progress log provides additional processing information.

Select Cancel to stop an active calculation.

After the automatic calculation is complete, calculated reflection positions are displayed over the experimental PNG.


Adjusting the calculated reflection display

Find the section labeled:

Display controls

The automatic reflection overlay can be adjusted using the following options.

Show automatic-calculator simulation points

Displays or hides the calculated reflection positions.

Show only the strongest automatic-calculator reflection positions

Limits the overlay to the strongest calculated reflections.

Keeping this enabled reduces visual clutter when many theoretical reflections are present.

Number of strongest automatic-calculator points

Controls the maximum number of calculated reflection positions displayed.

Hide automatic-calculator reflections in masked/invalid NPZ regions

Prevents calculated points from being displayed in regions marked as invalid by the NPZ mask.

These settings change the display only. They do not remove reflections from the underlying calculation.


Selecting an experimental peak

After the automatic calculation is complete, individual experimental peaks can be paired with calculated reflections.

First, left-click a visible experimental peak on the PNG.

The program records the selected location and obtains its numerical q coordinates and experimental intensity from the selected reference NPZ.

If peak snapping is enabled, the selected position is adjusted toward the nearby experimental peak center.

After the experimental peak is selected, the program waits for the corresponding calculated reflection to be assigned.


Assigning a calculated reflection

Calculated reflections are displayed as white circles.

There are two ways to create an assignment.

Method 1: Click the calculated reflection

Left-click the white calculated circle that corresponds to the selected experimental peak.

If the calculated point falls within the selected click tolerance, the experimental and calculated peaks are paired.

Method 2: Select an HKL candidate

If several calculated points are close together, or the appropriate white circle is difficult to select, use the nearest calculated HKL candidate list.

The candidate information includes:

- HKL
- calculated q coordinates
- difference in q
- match score
- support
- calculated intensity
- assignment stability

Select the appropriate calculated reflection and complete the assignment.


Repeating the process for additional peaks

Repeat the same process for each peak that should be compared:

1. Left-click an experimental peak.
2. Select the corresponding calculated reflection.
3. Complete the assignment.
4. Continue with the next experimental peak.

Each completed assignment is added to the experimental/calculated comparison table.


Reviewing the comparison table

The table below the reciprocal-space display contains the completed experimental/calculated assignments.

Two views are available.

Simple view

Displays the main quantities needed for routine interpretation, including peak identification, q position, spacing, intensity, and match quality.

Advanced view

Displays additional diagnostic fields generated by the indexing and comparison calculations.

Changing the table view changes only the displayed information. It does not recalculate or modify the peak assignments.


Exporting the results

After completing the desired peak assignments, select:

Export assignment CSV…

The experimental/calculated comparison table is saved as a CSV file.

Previously saved assignments can be loaded using:

Import assignment CSV…

This allows a previous set of manual peak assignments to be restored.


Important usage notes

PNG and NPZ files must correspond

The displayed PNG and selected reference NPZ should represent the same experimental measurement.

The PNG provides the visual location of the experimental peak.

The NPZ provides the numerical q coordinates and experimental intensity.

Using a PNG and NPZ from different measurements can produce incorrect comparisons.


CIF, NPZ, and PNG have separate functions

CIF: crystal structure and calculated reflections

NPZ: numerical experimental data

PNG: visual experimental image

The files are used together but are not interchangeable.


Automatic and manual reflection patterns are separate

The program can display a reflection pattern generated from manually selected lattice parameters, space group, and preferred orientation.

This reflection pattern is separate from the calculated reflection positions generated by the full automatic NPZ indexing calculator.


If the PNG is framed incorrectly

Check:

- qr minimum
- qr maximum
- qz minimum
- qz maximum

Then select:

Re-detect and frame image

Also confirm that Frame the PNG using the selected NPZ q axes is enabled when the corresponding NPZ has already been loaded.


If an NPZ cannot be loaded

For high-accuracy indexing, the NPZ should contain:

- intensity
- qr
- qz

NPZ files generated by the included PNG to NPZ converter contain these values.


If too many calculated reflections are displayed

Keep Show only the strongest automatic-calculator reflection positions enabled.

Decrease Number of strongest automatic-calculator points if the overlay remains crowded.

This changes only the visual display and does not alter the indexing calculation.


Standard workflow

1. Run the PNG to NPZ Converter with Python if numerical NPZ data is not already available.
2. Convert the experimental PNG to NPZ.
3. Run the GIWAXS/GIXS Indexing Workbench with Python.
4. Load the CIF file.
5. Load the experimental PNG.
6. Check the reciprocal-space limits.
7. Add the corresponding NPZ file.
8. Select the correct reference NPZ.
9. Run the full automatic indexing calculator.
10. Review the calculated reflection overlay.
11. Select an experimental peak.
12. Assign the corresponding calculated reflection.
13. Repeat for additional peaks.
14. Review the comparison table.
15. Export the assignments as a CSV file.
